# Express Day One Notes

## Table of Contents:

- [Setting it Up!](#setting-it-up)
  - [npm](#npm)
  - [Creating an express server](#creating-an-express-server)
  - [What is package.json?](#what-is-packagejson)
    - [name](#name)
    - [version](#version)
    - [description](#description)
    - [main](#main)
    - [scripts](#scripts)
    - [author](#author)
    - [license](#license)
    - [dependencies](#dependencies)

---

# Setting it up!

## npm
npm stands for Node Package Manager, and it will be your BEST FRIEND when working with express. This allows us to use packages from outside of vanilla JS.

## Creating an express server
In your terminal create a new folder for your project. Navigate inside of that folder and type in `npm init -y`. This will initialize a new node project within that folder. Once you have npm initialized we can install express with the command `npm install express`. This can be shortened to `npm i express` if you want to type less. This adds express to our project and makes everything else we do in here possible!

## what is package.json?
Your package.json is where all of the information about your project is stored. This includes the name of your starting file among other things. Yours should look something like this:
```
{
  "name": "my-first-server",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "server.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "node server.js"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.17.3",
  }
}
```
If you notice, I added a `start` script to our page. **This does not come packaged with your file by default**. It is important to add a start script so that your program knows what to do when it starts up.

## name
This is the name of your project. It is important to note that there are some formatting constraints on the name of your project, such as no capital letters, special characters (besides a dash), and no spaces. The best practice way of naming your project is how it looks above. "my first server" would become "my-first-server".

## version
This becomes more useful when you have more experience with making projects. This displays the current version number of your project. 1.0.0 is usually referring to your final finished project that fulfills your MVP. Before that is completed you will have version numbers less than 1.0.0, such as 0.0.1 (usually a starting point).

## description
This is used to describe your project and can be used to tell other developers looking at your package.json generally what your project is. This isn't used very often because README files exist for a reason, but it is an option.

## main
This is used to tell npm what your main file is. This is especially important when deploying your project online, because whatever your main file is will be the one that the hosting service runs to start your server.

## scripts
These are all of the possible scripts you can run that deal with things on your server. The most important one for yourself is the start script, which is what you will use to run your server. The way to run this in your console is to type `npm start`. For other scripts you will have to type `npm run scriptName`, but for your start script you just need to use the first way.

## author
This is your name! Take credit for your work!

## license
I honestly have no idea what this is so don't touch it.

## dependencies
**NEVER TOUCH THIS**. This is automatically generated by npm and is added to any time you add a new dependency with your command line. It is what tells other developers what is needed to run your code. This is super useful, because when someone else downloads your project they will not have all of your node modules. The first thing that is done when a new file is downloaded is to run `npm i` or `npm install` which looks at your package.json file's dependencies and automatically downloads all of them for you.

---

# Creating your server.js
Your server.js file (or index.js file if you prefer it) is where npm will go to see what to do when your server is started up. The first thing that needs to be done with your express app is to require it in your code. The way to do this is as follows:
```
const express = require('express');
```
This tells your program that the current file you are in is going to be using express, and gives it the name of `express` within your file. Anything you do with express will have the prefix of `express` associated with it.

To actually get your server to do anything, you next need to *create* your server. To do this you need to write the following:
```
const server = express()
```
This tells your program to create a new express server by running our express initializer, and calls it `server`.

These two things are needed before any other serverside stuff is done.

---

# Adding Content
Now that we have our project all set up we can start making *routes*. There are a few things you need to know first, however.

## CRUD
CRUD is a concept in backend development that governs everything we do. CRUD stands for **CREATE, READ, UPDATE, DELETE**. Every fully functioning server will have all four of these basic functions. These are all used to interface with your databse, which is the primary function of a backend.

### CREATE
Create is pretty obvious and is used to **CREATE** a new item in our database. **CREATE** is defined by the **POST** request type.

### READ
Read is used to **READ** data from our database. **READ** is defined by the **GET** request type.

### UPDATE
Update is also pretty obvious and is used to **UPDATE** data that is already in our database. **UPDATE** is defined by the **PUT** request type.

### DELETE
Delete is our final request type and is used to **DELETE** content from our database. **DELETE** is defined by the **DELETE** request type.

---

## *Actually* Adding Content